# SHA Payments Extraction and Analysis

## Overwiew
The Social Health Authority (SHA) is a statutory body in Kenya created to manage  three healthcare funds: mandatory deductions from formal employees and assessed contributions from the informal sector, and government funded Emergency, Chronic, and Critical Illness Fund, and the Primary Health Care Fund. The Government of Kenya hopes to use the authority to deliver the promise of Universal Health Coverage for all Kenyan citizens and residents. The management of reimbursements from these funds attracts a lot of interest, with many citizens calling SHA a failure and government officials doubling down on its successes. This continuing projects aims to collect and collate publicly available reimbursement and analyse it to contribute to the national debate.

## Technologies
- PDFPlumber
- Pandas
- RapidFuzz
- Matplotlib
- Seaborn
- Power Query
- Selenium
- ChromeDriver
  
## Features
- Reimbursement data was extracted from the PDFs published on SHA's website. During the process, I discovered that some of the PDFs were not native PDFs generated by the SHA ERP but scanned Excel sheets, leading to substantial variances between the extracted```.csv``` and the SHA PDFs. Power Query was used to extract the data for payments with large variances and resulting datasets used if better than automated extractions. December to February reimbursements were extracted from a PDF shared by PESAFLOW.
- Reimbursement data provided by SHA included the facility name, amount, and payment month. Additional dimensions: facility type (dispensary, health centre, medical clinic, nursing home, hospital), facility level (2 to 6), county, registration number, and status were obtained from the Kenya Medical Practitioners and Dentists Council (KMPDC) by scrapping all the records as at 07/09/2025. Dimensions for facilities registered by the Clinical Officers Council were obtained from the Kenya Master Health Facility Registry.
- The merged reimbursement data was merged with the facilities register. Closest matches for facilities not matched during the first merge were obtained using RapidFuzz and confirmed manually. Hand cleaning and triangulation with publicly available data (through internet search) reduced the number of unmatched facilities from 2200 to 34. These facilities include the the much maligned Tumticha Medical Center, B V, and B & L Healthcare

## Findings
- 66% of reimbuserments went to private facilities, contradicting the government assertion that private facilities criticized the SHA because they had been overshadowed by public facilities. The divide is even more pronounced in Level 2 and 3 facilities (dispensaries and health centres), which receive the bulk of government funds (PHCF and ECCIF) as private facilities received 80% of the reimbursements.
- Public Level 6 facilities (Kenyatta National Hospital, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, and Kenyatta University Teaching and Referral Hsopital) took the first three positions in total reimbursements, buttressing their role as providers of advanced care services. This good showing by the specialised teaching hospitals mask the capacity constraints in lower level public health facilities, especially from sub-county hospitals (Level 4) to dispensaries (Level 2), where private facilities took the lion's share of reimbursements.
- Consolata Mathari Town Annex, a Level 2 facility, received 54 million in the period analysed (April to mid-August), outperforming some Level 5 facilities.
- Uasin Gishu had the highest per-capita reimbursements at Ksh 1,901. This was 25 times higher than the lowest reimbursements recorded by Samburu County of a measly Ksh 74 for each of the county's 366,958 residents.
- Public facilties (Level 5 and below) in Nairobi County got only 13% of the reimbursements to the county in the reviewed period, demonstrating the extent to which healthcare services have been privatised in the county. Makueni was the stand-out performer at 68% of reimbursements going to public facilities. Other counties have a similar spread to the national average: about 30% to public and 70% to private facilities.

# Insights
- SHA faces serious sustainability issues. Apart from underperforming collections, the dominance of private facilities accentuates solvency problems due to higher costs of services as the providers do not receive any subsidies for recurrent and development expenditures. Public facilities will need further investments in infrastructure, staff counts and expertise, and managerial competence to approach or match the quality of services provided in private facilities and demanded by patients. 
- The wide variation in the per-capita reimbursements desrve further investigation. While Uasin Gishu has several Level 5 and 4 specialised facilties attracting patients from other counties, these facilities do not sufficiently explain the high reimbursements as they exceed Nairobi County with more referral facilities and higher number of SHIF members. The low reimbursments to Samburu, West Pokot, Narok, Turkana, Kwale, Marsabit, and Kilifi risk widening the gap in health outcomes and social determinants of health between these counties and their wealthier counterparts: Uasin Gishu, Nairobi, Kisii, Kirinyaga, and Nyeri.